---
title: Research Interests
date: 2017-06-15
weight: 1
---
# Overview

I work primarily at the intersection of natural science, social science, and 
public policy with a focus on coupled human-natural systems and on the ways in 
which scientific knowledge and uncertainty affect policy decisions about the 
environment.

My current work makes extensive use of agent-based models to simulate the ways 
that small changes in behavior at the individual level can add up to large-scale 
shifts at the level of the whole population, giving what is often referred to as 
"emergent phenomena." These models have the potential to help us identify 
vulnerabilities to environmental stress and opportunities to promote sustainable 
adaptations.

My past research has included nonlinear dynamics and chaos, quantum optics, 
stratospheric photochemistry, electrocardiology, physical mechanisms of laser 
surgery, laser processing and analysis of semiconductors, laser-cooling of 
atomic ions, and high-precision atomic and molecular spectroscopy.

# The Big Picture

All of my research interests relate to the question of how to society can manage 
environmental hazards within the context of democratic governance and 
significant scientific uncertainty.

For most important anthropogenic (human-caused) environmental hazards there is 
significant scientific uncertainty about the nature and severity of the 
consequences and this uncertainty makes many of the standard approaches to risk 
management ineffective. For instance, while it is unambiguous that human 
production of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases is changing earthâ€™s 
climate, scientists cannot predict with great certainty what the exact 
consequences of this climate change will be. Our scientific understanding of the 
effects of trace quantities of toxic pollutants in the environment is even less 
certain.

Environmental change, such as global warming, does not impose itself on passive 
landscapes or communities. Its impacts, both on physical landscapes and on the 
lives of the people who inhabit them, depends both on the physical environment 
and on the way people live in it. From heavily developed US coasts to rural 
areas of coastal Bangladesh land-use and engineering have dramatically affected 
the transport of sediment and water and these changes can have as great an 
impact on the coast as the sea level rise we anticipate due to global climate 
change, and different economic, political, and social conditions in communities 
on the coast will affect the impact of the changing landscape.

When natural hazards, such as floods, cyclones, or droughts, strike some 
communities show great resilience and recover quickly while others are 
devastated and slow to recover. My projects explore the coupling between human 
activity and the environment to understand why we see such differences in 
vulnerability and resilience and to identify possible ways for communities to 
become more robust in the face of environmental stress.

Managing both human activities that change the environment and adaptation by 
communities to environmental change requires not just technological and 
technocratic measures, such as flood-control infrastructure, renewable energy 
technology, and economically efficient regulatory policies, but also requires 
political legitimacy: both in the US (the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste 
repository and tradable permit regulations of greenhouse gas emissions) and in 
Bangladesh (the 1990 Flood Action Plan), environmental risk measures designed 
by top engineers have been rejected because they failed to win the trust and 
approval of the communities for which they were designed.

We also see numerous sites around Bangladesh of successful responses to 
environmental threats and stresses require integrating social and behavioral 
science
